### Welcome to the Sensu Go sandbox!

This tutorial will get you up and running with Sensu.

- [Set up the sandbox](#set-up-the-sandbox)
- [Lesson \#1: Create a monitoring event](#lesson-1-create-a-sensu-monitoring-event)
- [Lesson \#2: Create an event pipeline](#lesson-2-pipe-keepalive-events-into-slack)
- [Lesson \#3: Automate event production with the Sensu agent](#lesson-3-automate-event-production-with-the-sensu-agent)

Report issues or share feedback by [opening an issue in this repo](https://github.com/sensu/sandbox/issues/new).

---

## Set up the sandbox

**1. Install Vagrant and VirtualBox:**

- [Download Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html)
- [Download VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads)

**2. Download the sandbox:**

[Download from GitHub](https://github.com/sensu/sandbox/archive/master.zip) then unzip and enter the sensu-go sandbox directory 

```
unzip sandbox-master.zip && cd sandbox-master/sensu-go/core/
```

Or clone the repository:

```
git clone git@github.com:sensu/sandbox.git && cd sandbox/sensu-go/core
```

**3. Start Vagrant:**

```
ENABLE_SENSU_SANDBOX_PORT_FORWARDING=1 vagrant up
```

This will take around five minutes.

_NOTE: This will configure VirtualBox to forward a couple of tcp ports (3002,4002) from the sandbox VM machine to the localhost to make it easier for you to interact with the Sandbox dashboards. Dashboard links provided below assume port forwarding from the VM to the host is active and reference http://localhost._

**4. SSH into the sandbox:**

Thanks for waiting! To start using the sandbox:

```
vagrant ssh
```

You should now have shell access to the sandbox and should be greeted with this sandbox prompt:  

```
[sensu_go_sandbox]$
```

_NOTE: To exit out of the sandbox, use `CTRL`+`D`. Use `vagrant destroy` then `vagrant up` to erase and restart the sandbox. Use `vagrant provision` to reset sandbox's sensu configuration to the beginning of this lesson_

---

## Lesson \#1: Create a Sensu monitoring event

First off, we'll make sure everything is working correctly by creating a keepalive event with the Sensu agent.

**1. Get list of entities**

Sensu keeps track of monitored components as entities.
Let's use the sensuctl command line tool to make sure Sensu hasn't connected to any entities yet:

```
sensuctl entity list
```

We should see no entities in the list.

**2. Get list of events**

Let's check to make sure that no monitoring events have been created with Sensu:

```
sensuctl event list
```

We should see no events listed.

**3. Start the Sensu Agent**

Let's go ahead and start the Sensu agent to start monitoring the sandbox:

```
sudo systemctl start sensu-agent
```

We can use sensuctl to see that the sandbox agent is now being monitored by Sensu:

```
sensuctl entity list
```

Sensu agents send keepalive events to help you monitor their status.
We can use sensuctl to see the keepalive events generated by the sandbox entity:

```
sensuctl event list
```

The sensu-go-sandbox keepalive event has status 0, meaning the agent is successfully able to communicate with the server.
If we wait a minute and check the event list again you will set the `Last Seen` timestamp for the keepalive check has updated.  

We can also see the event and the client in the [dashboard event view](http://localhost:3002/#/events) and [entities view](http://localhost:3002/#/entities).

## Lesson \#2: Pipe keepalive events into Slack

Now that we know the sandbox is working properly, let's get to the fun stuff: creating a pipeline.
In this lesson, we'll create a pipeline to send keepalive alerts to Slack.
(If you'd rather not create a Slack account, you can skip ahead to [lesson 3](#lesson-3-automate-event-production-with-the-sensu-agent).)

W'll use the [Sensu Slack handler](https://github.com/sensu/sensu-slack-handler) to create our pipeline. For convenience, this command has been installed as part of sandbox provisioning. 

**1. Get your Slack webhook URL**

If you're already an admin of a Slack, visit `https://YOUR WORKSPACE NAME HERE.slack.com/services/new/incoming-webhook` and follow the steps to add the Incoming WebHooks integration, choose a channel, and save the settings.
(If you're not yet a Slack admin, start [here](https://slack.com/get-started#create) to create a new workspace.)
After saving, you'll see your webhook URL under Integration Settings.

**2. Test the Slack handler manually**
Run the following commands to apply your Slack channel and Slack webhook URl to the sandbox:
Make sure to change the channel string and webhook URL string to match your particular Slack configuration.
 
```
KEEPALIVE_SLACK_CHANNEL="#sensu-sandbox"
KEEPALIVE_SLACK_WEBHOOK="https://hooks.slack.com/services/AAA/BBB/CCC"
```

Now let's manually generate a Slack alert using the sandbox keepalive events:

```
sensuctl event info sensu-go-sandbox keepalive --format json | /usr/local/bin/sensu-slack-handler -c "${KEEPALIVE_SLACK_CHANNEL}" -w "${KEEPALIVE_SLACK_WEBHOOK"
```

If you have the correct channel and webhook url configured, you should now see a new message in Slack indicating that the sensu-go-sandbox is in a ok state.  

Now let's disable the agent service and wait a couple of minutes for the keepalive check to enter the warning state (status = 1).

```
sudo systemctl stop sensu-agent
``` 

Now is a good time to grab a cup of coffee, or browse the Sensu documentation for a couple of minutes. 
Let's check to make sure the sandbox keepalive is now in a failed state.

```  
sensuctl event list
```  

The keepalive event should report status = 1 after the agent has been stopped for a couple of minutes.  Once the sandbox entity is in a failed state, we can manually run the Slack handler again.

```
sensuctl event info sensu-go-sandbox keepalive --format json | /usr/local/bin/sensu-slack-handler -c "${KEEPALIVE_SLACK_CHANNEL}" -w "${KEEPALIVE_SLACK_WEBHOOK"

```
The resulting Slack message now indicates a warning (status = 1).
Now that we ensured that the Slack handler is working correctly, let's build a Sensu keepalive pipeline.  

**3. Edit sensu-slack-handler.json**
Open the Slack handler definition provided with the sandbox:

```
nano sensu-slack-handler.json
```

And edit it to include the same Slack channel and webhook URL you added in the previous step.

**4. Create the handler definition using sensuctl**

```
sensuctl create -f sensu-slack-handler.json
```

We can confirm that we now have a Sensu Slack handler with sensuctl:

```  
sensuctl handler list
```

**5. Test Slack handler pipeline**
Restart the Sensu agent to resume producing keepalive events.

```
sudo systemctl restart sensu-agent
```

Once the agent begins to send keepalive events, you should see a new message in Slack indicating that the sandbox entity is in an ok state.

**6. Filter keepalive events**

Now that we're generating Slack alert automatically, let's reduce the potential for alert fatigue by ensuring that Sensu sends only warning, critical, and resolution alerts to Slack.

To accomplish this, we'll interactively add the built-in `is_incident` filter to the keepalive handler pipeline so we'll only receive alerts when the sandbox entity fails to send a keepalive event.

```
sensuctl handler update 
```

When prompted for the filters selection, enter `is_incident` to apply the built-in incidents filter.

```
? Filters: [? for help] is_incident
```

We can confirm that the Slack handler now includes the incidents filter using sensuctl:

```
sensuctl handler info keepalive
```

Now with the filter in place we should no longer be receiving messages in the Slack channel every time the sandbox entity sends a keepalive event.

Let's stop the agent and confirm that we receive the expected warning message.

```
sudo systemctl stop sensu-agent
```

We should see the warning message after a couple of minutes, informing you that the sandbox entity is no longer sending keepalive events.

## Lesson \#3: Automate event production with the Sensu agent
So far we've used only the Sensu agent's built-in keepalive feature, but in this lesson, we'll create a check that automatically produces workload-related events.
Instead of sending alerts to Slack, we'll store event data with [InfluxDB](https://www.influxdata.com/) and visualize it with [Grafana](https://grafana.com/).

**1. Install Nginx and the Sensu HTTP Plugin**

We'll use the [Sensu HTTP Plugin](https://github.com/sensu-plugins/sensu-plugins-http) to monitor an Nginx server running on the sandbox.

First, install and start Nginx:

```
sudo yum install -y nginx && sudo systemctl start nginx
```

And make sure it's working with:

```
curl -I http://localhost:80
```

Then install the Sensu HTTP Plugin:

```
sudo sensu-install -p sensu-plugins-http
```

We'll be using the `metrics-curl.rb` plugin.
We can test its output using:

```
/opt/sensu-plugins-ruby/embedded/bin/check-http.rb -u "http://localhost"
```

```
$ /opt/sensu-plugins-ruby/embedded/bin/metrics-curl.rb -u "http://localhost"
...
sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.http_code 200 1535670975
```

**2. Create a check to monitor Nginx**

Use a configuration file to create a service check that runs `metrics-curl.rb` every 10 seconds on all entities with the `entity:sensu-go-sandbox` subscription and send it to the InfluxDB metrics handler pipeline:

```
sudo nano check_curl_timings.json
```

Notice how we are defining a metrics handler and metric format. In Sensu Go metrics are a core element of the data model, and we can build pipelines to handle metrics separately from the alerts!
This allows us to customize our monitoring workflows to get better visibility and reduce alert fatigue.

Use sensuctl to create a check to monitor Nginx:

```
sensuctl create -f curl_timings-check.json
```

We can use sensuctl to confirm that the check has been created:

```
sensuctl check list
```  

After about 10 seconds, we can see the event produced by the entity:

```
sensuctl event info sensu-go-sandbox curl_timings --format json |jq .
...
  "metrics": {
    "handlers": [
      "influx-db"
    ],
    "points": [
      {
        "name": "sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.time_total",
        "value": 0.005,
        "timestamp": 1543532948,
        "tags": []
      },
      {
        "name": "sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.time_namelookup",
        "value": 0.005,
        "timestamp": 1543532948,
        "tags": []
      },
      {
        "name": "sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.time_connect",
        "value": 0.005,
        "timestamp": 1543532948,
        "tags": []
      },
      {
        "name": "sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.time_pretransfer",
        "value": 0.005,
        "timestamp": 1543532948,
        "tags": []
      },
      {
        "name": "sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.time_redirect",
        "value": 0,
        "timestamp": 1543532948,
        "tags": []
      },
      {
        "name": "sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.time_starttransfer",
        "value": 0.005,
        "timestamp": 1543532948,
        "tags": []
      },
      {
        "name": "sensu-go-sandbox.curl_timings.http_code",
        "value": 200,
        "timestamp": 1543532948,
        "tags": []
      }
    ]
  }
```

Because we configured a metric-format, the Sensu agent was able to convert the Graphite-formatted metrics provided by the check command into a set of Sensu-formatted metrics. Metric support isn't limited to just Graphite, the Sensu agent can extract metrics in multiple line protocol formats, including Nagios performance data.  Now let's create the InfluxDB handler to store these metrics and visualize them with Grafana.

**3. Create an InfluxDB pipeline**

Since we've already installed InfluxDB as part of the sandbox, all we need to do to create an InfluxDB pipeline is create a Sensu handler. As part of sandbox provisioning, a version of the sensu-influxdb-handler has been installed for convenience. 

Take a look at the provided configuration file:

```
nano influx-handler.json
```

To create the handler from the config, just use the sensuctl create command:

```
sensuctl create -f influx-handler.json
```

We can use sensuctl to confirm that the handler has been created successfully:

```
sensuctl handler list
```

**4. See the HTTP response code events for Nginx in [Grafana](http://localhost:4002/d/core01/sensu-go-sandbox).**

Log in to Grafana as username: `admin` password: `admin`.
We should see a graph of real HTTP response codes for Nginx.

Now if we turn Nginx off, we should see the impact in Grafana:

```
sudo systemctl stop nginx
```

Start Nginx:

```
sudo systemctl start nginx
```

**5. Automate disk usage monitoring for the sandbox**

Now that we have an entity set up, we can easily add more checks.
For example, let's say we want to monitor disk usage on the sandbox.

First, install the plugin:

```
sudo sensu-install -p sensu-plugins-disk-checks
```

And test it:

```
/opt/sensu-plugins-ruby/embedded/bin/metrics-disk-usage.rb
```

```
$ /opt/sensu-plugins-ruby/embedded/bin/metrics-disk-usage.rb
sensu-core-sandbox.disk_usage.root.used 2235 1534191189
sensu-core-sandbox.disk_usage.root.avail 39714 1534191189
...
```

Then create the check using sensuctl, assigning it to the `entity:sensu-go-sandbox` subscription and the InfluxDB pipeline:

```
sensuctl create -f disk_usage-check.json
```

And we should see it working in the [dashboard entity view][http://localhost:3002/#/entities] and via sensuctl:

```
sensuctl event list
```

Now we should be able to see disk usage metrics for the sandbox in [Grafana](http://localhost:4002/d/go02/sensu-go-sandbox-combined).

You made it! You're ready for the next level of Sensu-ing.
Here are some resources to help continue your journey:

- [Install Sensu Go](https://docs.sensu.io/sensu-go/latest/installtion/install-sensu)
- [Collect StatsD metrics](https://docs.sensu.io/sensu-go/latest/guides/aggregate-metrics-statsd)
- [Create a ready-only user](https://docs.sensu.io/sensu-go/latest/guides/create-read-only-user/)
